[Music]
Now I want to give you some outlook
about the current state of the art in C++.
So I want to show you some new features
from the C++ 20 standard.
So first a few words about C++ 20 standard in general.
Currently I would not suggest to use it
in all of your new codes,
because not all compilers fully support it yet.
Of course this will change in the next few months
and then of course you can also use it
for all of your projects.
So what are the new C++ features,
that are introduced in the C++ 20 standard.
I just want to give you a brief overview.
More details will be added later on,
also in our course, when all the compilers are available
and all the tests are fully functional.
First of all co-routines were introduced.
So they are for asynchronous programming.
I will show an example of coroutines later on.
Then there were contracts.
Contracts. So this is a feature,
that almost made it into the C++ 20 standard.
But of course features change.
So some features are dropped last minute,
some features come in new.
This is a dynamic process,
but basically the contracts define interfaces for functions
letting you define pre and post conditions.
Currently I do not include them.
Then we have the concepts.
This is an extension for templates to define
semantic categories for the allowed types.
It's kind of a more powerful way to control,
which types you want to use
within your template parameters.
And this really helps to do a better
and also more robust programming with templates.
Since this is a very advanced topic,
I will also not include it here in the lecture.
Then the ranges library was introduced,
to apply the STL containers to algorithms.
So this kind of extends iterators.
So you can define "fuse" on, for example,
parts of your vector.
This is something that is very practical.
And modules, this is the last thing.
It is very important
and a very fundamental change in C++ 20,
because this provides you an alternative
to the header and source files.
This will influence all C++ programs and principles.
Since all these features are new,
as I have mentioned, only two of them
I will now go into a little bit more detail.
And these are coroutines and modules.
So let's start with the modules.
In my opinion this is really the most important
new feature in the C++ 20 standard,
because the modules are intended to overcome
the restrictions of header files.
So for example the separation of header
and source files becomes obsolete.
This is really cool,
because it will provide you a compile time speed-up.
A module is only imported once
and then should be literally for free.
In the standard C++ code you have,
for example M header files and you include them
in N  translation units and then of course
you have to parse this header M times N times.
So this is really very time consuming
for a larger project.
The second thing is you then have an isolation
from the preprocessor macros.
So of course you want to get rid of
these preprocessor macros.
It's only a text substitution and does exclude
any C++ semantics.
So it's very error-prone if you just do text substitution.
There is no type checking for example.
And this has also many negative consequences.
For example it depends on
in which sequence you include macros,
or macros can clash with already defined macros,
or names in your application.
For the modules it makes no difference
in which order you import them.
This is really much better.
Next thing is you get a possibility to express
the logical structure of your code.
The modules allow you to express
which names should be exported or not explicitly.
So you can for example bundle a few modules
into a bigger module
and then provide them to your customer as a logical package.
You don't need any header files anymore.
So there is no need to separate your files
into an interface and an implementation part.
This is handled by the modules.
In fact you half the number of source files.
And you also get rid of ugly workarounds.
For example the header guard,
where you use macros, this will just vanish.
Now of course also a first example
on how you can use these modules.
In the top here you define the module "math.cppm"
The ending here, the suffix "cppm",
this is so far depending on the compiler you are using.
So I call it here "cppm",
"C++ modules" so to say.
You can first write what module it is.
So you have to export module "math".
You define the module "math".
And then inside the module,
you can now specify which functions, which variables,
which classes you want to export.
In this case,
we have one class of one function, that is called "add"
and we want to export it such that it can be used
in other parts of the code, that import our module.
And now if you look at the "main.cpp",
all you have to do is you have to write "import math",
then you get all the exported things
and then in the main function,
you can for example call this function
directly from the module.
This is very nice.
Now let's take a look at a more complex example
and also use an interface.
There is the possibility to have module interface units,
where you just specify the signatures,
for example for the function,
without the implementation.
"export module math1" and then
you just specify this "add" function
and in addition to that you have done
a module implementation unit,
where you write "module math1" and then you have
the implementation of the function.
And in the main program you have the same as before.
You can import the "math1" module
and then you can use the "add" function.
In order to complete our example,
let's take a look at the compilation of the module.
So we are using here the clang
for other compilers that may be different.
In the clang case you first
have to pre-compile the module.
And this is the module interface "math1"
and as a result you get such a precompiled module.
This is step one.
Step two basically compiles then
the precompiled module into an object file
and the source file also into an object file.
In step three you can compile the main program.
And four creates then the executable,
just by specifying all object files
and this precompiled module.
This is a new way of setting up
and compiling your C++ project.
The second new thing that I want to present
from the C++ 20 standard
is co-routines.
Co-routines are basically functions,
that can suspend and resume the execution,
while they keep their state.
That means you run a function,
then you stop, you do something else
and then you can continue at the same position
and with the same state in the function.
This is of course also a very nice new feature.
In order to realize this,
basically new keywords were added
to the C++ 20 standard and these are "co_await" and "co_yield".
In general of course the concept
of a function was extended.
This "co_await" expression makes it possible
to suspend and resume the execution
and if you use the "co_await" expression in a function,
for example called "func",
then the call "getResult = func()" has not to be blocking.
So it can return immediately,
if the result of the function is not available.
And instead of this resource consuming blocking,
you can have a resource friendly waiting.
The "co_yield" expression enables you
to write a generator function
and this generator function returns on request,
each time you call it a new value.
That means the generator function
is a kind of a data stream,
from which you can pick values.
It can be in principle infinite.
So you can pick an arbitrary number of values from there.
Conceptionally this allows you lazy evaluation in C++.
So also an example on that.
We have a generator for numbers function.
What we want to do is:
we want to call this function
and every time we call it,
we get a new number returned.
For that we have this for loop in the function body,
we start at a certain value,
so that is passed as begin to the function
and then we increase by a certain step size.
This is also provided as an argument to the function.
And inside the function we have this "co_yield".
The special thing is the return type
is now a generator of integers.
This tells the C++ language, okay,
here I will get back integer numbers
and this is a coroutine and
uses "co_yield" instead of return.
In the main function you define your numbers.
And you first use the generator for numbers minus 10.
So it starts at minus 10
and always increases by 1.
And then you print 20 times a number.
20, 19 and so on.
After that you create a new generator
for numbers from 0 to 5
and in this for loop you basically never end.
So it will basically print numbers
starting from 0 with a step size or increment of 5
and forever it will return you these numbers.
This is a new feature offered by the C++20 standard.
Altogether, this standard introduces
some nice new features.
The next standard is planned for 2023.
So every three years this is the intention
the C++ language gets some new features.
In general of course in this course
it is just meant to be an outlook.
So you don't have to use all of these
new features in your programs,
but you should have in mind,
that as any language or especially also computer language,
C++ is of course not static,
but it is under development and changes.
So thank you very much for your attention
and I hope that you have enjoyed our course,
that will be updated regularly.
So this was now the first semester that we offered it.
So the contents are in principle complete,
but nevertheless we will try to add more material,
such that you can get more practice,
because this is the most important thing,
when you learn a new computer language,
that you practice on your own
and really program in it
[Music]